Add RAI Redemption Rate APR as Price Identifiers (#232)
UMAprotocol/UMIPs: UMIPs/umip_add_R3_price_identifiers.md

if person A calculates the price request result as 1.53453 $RAI and person B calculates the price request result as 1.53489 $RAI, both will agree on 1.53 $RAI.

<br>

# IMPLEMENTATION

For querying the historical redemption rate coefficient APR, RAI subgraphs should be used, with sample query from
MARKET & DATA SOURCES

```graphql
{
  redemptionRates(
    first: 1000
    orderBy: createdAt
    orderDirection: desc
    where: { createdAt_gte: START_TIMESTAMP, createdAt_lte: END_TIMESTAMP }
  ) {
    annualizedRate
  }
}
```

### R3_10H_TWAP (Pre-cutoff)

For price requests made before the cutoff, use this 10-hour TWAP calculation implementation.

1. The end TWAP timestamp equals the price request timestamp.
2. The start TWAP timestamp is defined by the end TWAP timestamp minus the TWAP period (10 hours in this case).
3. A single redemption rate coefficient APR value is defined for each timestamp as the price that the subgraph
   returns at the end of the latest block whose timestamp is <= the timestamp that is queried for.
4. The TWAP is an average of the rates for each timestamp between the start and end timestamps.

>    Each price in this average will get equal weight.

Reviewer: It is bit misleading to call it TWAP (time weighted) then. E.g., if during the 10h period there are 2 APR values that were valid for 4h each and the 3rd APR value has been valid only the last 2h within 10h period - should all 3 APR values get the same weight?

Author: I actually took the TWAP calculation from UMIP-22. That look odd to me also. 

Since my price feed implementation uses the same [function to calculate the TWAP](
https://github.com/UMAprotocol/protocol/blob/b8225c580ea48f58ef44aa308f966fbed5a99cf3/packages/financial-templates-lib/src/price-feed/utils.js#L271-L304) as UniswapPriceFeed, which is used by uGAS, uSTONKS and many other feeds, I assume that it is the accepted definition.
Now looking back to `computeTWAP` it actually calculates the proper TWAP instead of simply average.

@smb2796 is the TWAP calculation from UMIP-22 correct?

Author: RR = Redemption rate coefficient value
TT = Total time window (10hrs)
TI = Time interval for which RR value persisted

1. The end TWAP timestamp equals the price request timestamp.
2. The start TWAP timestamp is defined by the end TWAP timestamp minus the TWAP period (10 hours in this case).
3. A single redemption rate coefficient APR value (RR) is defined for each timestamp as the price that the subgraph
   returns at the end of the latest block whose timestamp is <= the timestamp that is queried for.
4. The TWAP is a time weighted average of the rates for each timestamp between the start and end timestamps.
   Each price in this average will get weight equal to its time period (TI). TWAP will be calculated as ∑(RR * TI) / TT
5. As the values from subgraph are integers, so it should be left as returned without any scaling transformation.
6. The final price should be submitted with 18 decimals but rounded to 2 decimal places. For example, if the value is
   1.384827478767976545678765456, then round to 2 decimal places and convert 1-to-1 to RAI for 1.38 RAI.
   
   
   is this good ? @Reinis-FRP

## HEADERS

| UMIP 232          |                                                                                                 |
| ----------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| UMIP Title        | Add R3-10H-TWAP and R3-30D-GM as supported price identifiers                                    |
| Authors           | Ashutosh Varma (ashutoshvarma11@live.com)                                                       |
| Status            | Draft                                                                                           |
| Created           | April 1, 2021                                                                                   |
| Link to Discourse | [LINK](https://discourse.umaproject.org/t/add-rai-redemption-rate-apr-as-price-identifiers/624) |

# SUMMARY

This UMIP will reference a synthetic token to be created with this price identifier.
This token will be referred to as 'R3' (Rai Redemption Rate) and will represent the token that tracks these identifiers.

The DVM should support price requests for the R3-10H-TWAP and R3-30D-GM price indices.

> The DVM should support requests for a price that resolves to either the 30 day geometric mean (R3-30D-GM) or

Reviewer 2: I assume the rate is always positive if you are using a geometric mean - could there ever be a negative rate?

Author: Both price feeds use a redemption rate coefficient which cannot be negative.

   ```graphql
   {
     redemptionRates(
       first: 1000
       orderBy: createdAt
       orderDirection: desc
       where: { createdAt_gte: START_TIMESTAMP, createdAt_lte: END_TIMESTAMP }
     ) {
       annualizedRate
     }
   }
   ```

4. Do these sources allow for querying up to 74 hours of historical data?

   - Yes

5. Is an API key required to query these sources?

   - No

6. Is there a cost associated with usage?

   - No

7. If there is a free tier available, how many queries does it allow for?

   - No limits at the moment.

8. What would be the cost of sending 15,000 queries?

   - $0

<br>

# PRICE FEED IMPLEMENTATION

For the creation of the R3 token, it is desired that the DVM return either the 30 day geometric mean or a 10-hour TWAP.
The type of price that the DVM will return is dependent on the timestamp the price request is made at.

[Here](https://github.com/ashutoshvarma/protocol/blob/rai-price-feed/packages/financial-templates-lib/src/price-feed/RAIRedemptionRate.js)
is a reference implementation for an off-chain price feed that can both 10-hr TWAP and 30-day GM of redemption rate coefficient .

> 

Reviewer 2: @pemulis  - could you check the price feed implementation to make sure it will work with our contracts?

Reviewer 3: This looks really good! @ashutoshvarma can you submit this as a PR [here](https://github.com/UMAprotocol/protocol/tree/master/packages/financial-templates-lib/src/price-feed)?

Author: Sure

Reviewer 3: Thanks!

<br>

# TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS

## R3-10H-TWAP

> **1. Price Identifier Name** - R3-10H-TWAP

Reviewer 2: Underscores are more common in names

**2. Base Currency** - R3

**3. Quote currency** - RAI

**4. Intended Collateral Currency** - RAI

- Does the value of this collateral currency match the standalone value of the listed quote currency?

  - YES

- Is your collateral currency already approved to be used by UMA financial contracts?

  - YES

**5. Collateral Decimals** - 18

**6. Rounding** - Round to nearest 2 decimal places (third decimal place digit >= 5 rounds up and < 5 rounds down)

## R3-30D-GM

**1. Price Identifier Name** - R3-30D-GM

**2. Base Currency** - R3

**3. Quote currency** - RAI

**4. Intended Collateral Currency** - RAI

- Does the value of this collateral currency match the standalone value of the listed quote currency?

  - YES

- Is your collateral currency already approved to be used by UMA financial contracts? If no, submit a UMIP to have the desired collateral currency approved for use.

>   - NO, but there is a separate pending UMIP for approving RAI as collateral currency

Reviewer 2: RAI was approved as a collateral currency in UMIP 77

<br>

# RATIONALE

### R3-10H-TWAP (Pre-cutoff)

Due to the lack of ambiguity on calculating the TWAP, UMA token holders should all converge on the same price.
However, to be consistent with post-cutoff rounding, we will round pre-cutoff to 2 decimal places.

A 10-hour TWAP was chosen to mitigate any risk of attempted price manipulation attempts on the value of redemption rate.
To meaningfully manipulate the price that token sponsors’ collateralization is calculated with, an attacker would have to manipulate
the redemption rate for an extended amount of time. This is described further in the Security Considerations section.

Also a 10-hour TWAPs ensures that atleast 2 data points are used to calculate TWAP since redemption rate is
updated every 4 hours

### R3-30D-GM (Post-cutoff)

We're using a rolling 30 day period to increase the cost of manipulating the APR price.

We use geometric mean, as opposed to arithmetic mean, to include the effect of rate compounding.

We use an annual percentage rate, as opposed to a 24hr percentage rate or per-second rate, to increase usability.

> 

Reviewer 2: Stylistically it would be better for this to be written in the third person.

The ground truth data for this is in the RAI OracleRelayer smart contract on the Ethereum blockchain.

> Any differences in UMA governor results for this price identifier should be due to rounding errors that propagate through the calculation (numerical instability)

Reviewer 2: If rounding is done at the end, this should not be an issue.

Author: Then, can it be removed?

Reviewer 2: dont see why not

{
  redemptionRates(
    first: 1000
    orderBy: createdAt
    orderDirection: desc
    where: { createdAt_gte: START_TIMESTAMP, createdAt_lte: END_TIMESTAMP }
  ) {
    annualizedRate
  }
}
```

### R3-10H-TWAP (Pre-cutoff)

For price requests made before the cutoff, use this 10-hour TWAP calculation implementation.

1. The end TWAP timestamp equals the price request timestamp.
2. The start TWAP timestamp is defined by the end TWAP timestamp minus the TWAP period (10 hours in this case).
3. A single redemption rate coefficient APR value is defined for each timestamp as the price that the subgraph
   returns at the end of the latest block whose timestamp is <= the timestamp that is queried for.
4. The TWAP is an average of the rates for each timestamp between the start and end timestamps.
   Each price in this average will get equal weight.
5. As the values from subgraph are integers, so it should be left as returned without any scaling transformation.
6. The final price should be submitted with 18 decimals but rounded to 2 decimal places. For example, if the value is
   1.384827478767976545678765456, then we round to 2 decimal places and convert 1-to-1 to RAI for 1.38 RAI.

>    However, RAI on Ethereum uses 18 decimal places so voters must submit 1.380000000000000000 RAI.

Reviewer 2: @smb2796 iCan we acceot 1,38 rather thanf force the trailing zeros?

Reviewer 3: Yes we can. All price identifiers are treated as 18 decimals by default, so it could just be submitted as 1.38 which would then be converted by the voter dapp to `1380000000000000000` before being submitted. @ashutoshvarma this is the desired behavior, correct?

Author: Yes

Reviewer 3: Awesome, I think the 18 decimal place instructions can be removed then.

Reviewer 3: Awesome, I think the 18 decimal place instructions can be removed then.

## HEADERS

| UMIP 232          |                                                                                                 |
| ----------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| UMIP Title        | Add R3_10H_TWAP and R3_30D_GM as supported price identifiers                                    |
| Authors           | Ashutosh Varma (ashutoshvarma11@live.com)                                                       |
| Status            | Draft                                                                                           |
| Created           | April 1, 2021                                                                                   |
| Link to Discourse | [LINK](https://discourse.umaproject.org/t/add-rai-redemption-rate-apr-as-price-identifiers/624) |

# SUMMARY

This UMIP will reference a synthetic token to be created with this price identifier.
This token will be referred to as 'R3' (Rai Redemption Rate) and will represent the token that tracks these identifiers.

> The DVM should support price requests for the R3_10H_TWAP and R3_30D_GM price indices.

Reviewer 3: Just curious, is the intention to use R3_10H_TWAP pre-expiry and R3_30D_GM at expiry?

The DVM should support requests for a price that resolves to either the 30 day geometric mean (R3_30D_GM) or

> a 10-hour Time-Weighted Average Price (R3_10H_TWAP) of RAI redemption rate coefficient APR

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
a 10-hour Time-Weighted Average Price (R3_10H_TWAP) of RAI redemption rate coefficient APR.
```

> The price resolution method to use will depend on the timestamp the price request was made at.

Reviewer 3: I really like this solution! Since there are now two price identifiers and I'm assuming you all are intending to use the FPL to switch price identifiers at expiry, it doesn't seem like the voters will need to factor the timestamp into which calculation methodology they should use. This is pretty awesome, but also makes this language seem a little misleading.

Wondering if you can soften this language a bit and explain that the intention is to ues the R3_10H_TWAP pre expiry etc, but voters should always return the value based off of which price identifier is being requested.

Author: Yeah, we will be using FPL to switch between price ids.

> Wondering if you can soften this language a bit 

```suggestion
The price resolution method for the R3 token will depend on the timestamp the price request was made at
but voters should always return the value-based off on which price identifier is being requested.
```
How does this sound?
